documentation for in-place migrations with x/upgrade module (#8967)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/core/upgrade.md

### Consensus Version
The consensus version is defined on each app module by the module developer. It serves as the breaking change version of the module. The consensus version helps to inform the SDK on which modules need to be upgraded. For example, if the bank module was version 2 and an upgrade introduces bank module 3, the SDK will know to upgrade the bank module and run its "version 2 to 3" migration script.

### Version Map
The version map is a mapping of module names to consensus versions. The map is persisted to x/upgrade's state for use during in-place migrations. When migrations finish, the updated version map is persisted to state. 

## Upgrade Handlers

Upgrades utilize an `UpgradeHandler` to facilitate migrations. `UpgradeHandler`s are functions implemented by the app developer that conform to the following function signature. These functions retrieve the `VersionMap` from x/upgrade's state, and return the new `VersionMap` to be stored in x/upgrade after the upgrade. The diff between the two `VersionMap`s determines which modules need upgrading.

```golang
type UpgradeHandler func(ctx sdk.Context, plan Plan, fromVM VersionMap) (VersionMap, error)
```

> Inside these functions, you should perform any upgrade logic you wish to include in the provided `plan`. All upgrade handler functions should end with the following line of code:

Reviewer: https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#letter-s 
I think we mean "must" here 
Using "should" is almost never the right word. 
> Because should is ambiguous by definition, it can be problematic. For instance, if you're telling the reader what to do, should implies that the action is recommended but optional, leaving the reader unsure about what to do.
Clarify what you mean. Determine if an action is required versus optional, an outcome is expected versus possible, or a state is actual versus recommended.
An action is required. Use must, or rephrase the sentence so that it is a clear imperative instruction such as Do the following before you continue.
An action is recommended. Use We recommend... or Google recommends…. You can use should if a recommended action is generally recognized—for example, You should use a strong password…, or, You should follow the principle of least privilege....

```golang
  return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, fromVM)
```

## Running Migrations

> Migrations are run inside of an `UpgradeHandler` via `app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, vm)`. As described above, `UpgradeHandler`s are functions which describe the functionality to occur during an upgrade. The `RunMigration` function will loop through the `VersionMap` argument, and run the migration scripts for any versions that are less than the new binary's app module versions. Once the migrations are finished, a new `VersionMap` will be returned to persist the upgraded module versions to state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migrations are run inside of an `UpgradeHandler` using  `app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, vm)`. The `UpgradeHandler` functions describe the functionality to occur during an upgrade. The `RunMigration` function loops through the `VersionMap` argument and runs the migration scripts for all versions that are less than the versions of the new binary app module. After the migrations are finished, a new `VersionMap` is returned to persist the upgraded module versions to state.
```

```golang
cfg := module.NewConfigurator(...)
app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, vm module.VersionMap) (module.VersionMap, error) {

    // ...
    // do upgrade logic
    // ...

    // RunMigrations returns the VersionMap
    // with the updated module ConsensusVersions
    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, vm)
})
```

> To learn more about configuring migration scripts for your modules, refer to this [guide](../building-modules/upgrade.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about configuring migration scripts for your modules, see the [Migration Upgrade Guide](../building-modules/upgrade.md).
```

Reviewer: I don't know what the actual guide name is, but use descriptive link text to help our user, thanks!

> ## Adding New Modules In Upgrades

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adding New Modules During Upgrades
```

> Entirely new modules can be introduced to the application during an upgrade. The SDK recognizes new modules during upgrades because their consensus version in the `fromVM` `VersionMap` is 0. In this case, `RunMigrations` will call the corresponding module's `InitGenesis` function to setup its initial state. This can be skipped if the module does not require any inital state. Otherwise, it is important to implement `InitGenesis` for new modules to successfully upgrade your application without error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can introduce entirely new modules to the application during an upgrade. New modules are recognized because their consensus version in the `fromVM` `VersionMap` is 0. In this case, `RunMigrations` calls the  `InitGenesis` function from the corresponding module to set up its initial state. If the module requires an initial state, run `InitGenesis` to ensure new modules can successfully upgrade your application without error. 
```

> In the scenario where your application does not need any inital state via `InitGenesis`, you must take extra steps to ensure `InitGenesis` is skipped to avoid errors. To do so, you simply need to update the value of the module version in the `VersionMap` in the `UpgradeHandler`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the new module does not require an initial state, you can skip running `InitGenesis`. Instead, manually update the value of the module version in the `VersionMap` in `UpgradeHandler`. 
```

```go
// Foo is a new module being introduced
// in this upgrade plan
import foo "github.com/my/module/foo"

app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, vm module.VersionMap)  (module.VersionMap, error) {
    // We make sure to set foo's version to the latest ConsensusVersion in the VersionMap.
    // This will skip running InitGenesis on Foo
    vm["foo"] = foo.AppModule{}.ConsensusVersion()

    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, vm)
})
```

> Using a similar method, you can also run `InitGenesis` on your new module with a custom genesis state:

Reviewer: so we can manually update the value of the module version in the `VersionMap` in `UpgradeHandler` (line 79) or we can run `InitGenesis` on your new module with a custom genesis state?
what are the use cases for doing one or the other? If there isn't a difference, I recommend that we give one method only. If there are use cases for or against, we should describe the benefits

Reviewer 2: That's a good point.

For new modules, the default behavior is to run `InitGenesis` with the genesis state chosen by the _module developer_, which acts like a sane default. The module developer implements that in `AppModule.InitGenesis`.

However, there might be cases where the _app developer_ wants to overwrite that sane default. In this case, the app developer can update the module version in `VersionMap` and run `InitGenesis` with their own custom  genesis state.

I agree that the use cases for and against could be described here 👍

Author: Would this imply that, for an arbitrary upgrade, both the app dev and the module dev have written two genesis functions, which are now in competition for the upgrade? 

Couldn't the app developer just change the InitGenesis function in the module? Otherwise it feels a bit hacky and confusing imo. Thoughts @amaurym ?

Reviewer 2: > Couldn't the app developer just change the InitGenesis function in the module?

I guess i'm thinking about the case where the app developer != the module developer, e.g. Regen importing x/authz in its next upgrade, but wants a custom genesis for x/authz. In the regen repo, we can't change x/authz's InitGenesis, so we must use the "setting the vm value" method to run a custom InitGenesis.

For modules where app developer == module developer, yeah it's nonsensical to write 2 genesis functions.

Author: ahhh okay thats what i was missing. i'll update the docs to reflect this

Author: [updated overwriting genesis seciton](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/8967/commits/7883af3bee69ef1232c670271e4254ba2515c3f6)

@barriebyron @amaurym

<!--
order: 15
-->

# In-Place Store Migrations

::: warning
Read and understand all of the in-place store migration documentation before you run a migration on a live chain.
:::

Upgrade your app modules smoothly with custom in-place migration logic. {synopsis}

The Cosmos SDK uses two methods to perform upgrades. 

- Exporting the entire application state to a JSON file using the `export` CLI command, making changes, and then starting a new binary with the changed JSON file as the genesis file. See the [Chain Upgrade Guide](../migrations/chain-upgrade-guide-040.md#upgrade-procedure). 

- Version v0.43 and later can perform upgrades in place to significantly decrease the upgrade time for chains with a larger state. Use the [Migration Upgrade Guide](../building-modules/upgrade.md) guide to set up your application modules to take advantage of in-place upgrades.

> 

Reviewer 2: I remember reading a sentence saying something like "this document describes the 2nd method", imo it's still useful to add it here

Author: [specified method](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/8967/files#diff-7919f886ac1c280f5bc85e12992892df7f160c4ab535e878d2f1510f6d11489cR18-R21)

<!--
order: 15
-->

# In-Place Store Migrations

::: warning
Read and understand all of the in-place store migration documentation before you run a migration on a live chain.
:::

Upgrade your app modules smoothly with custom in-place migration logic. {synopsis}

The Cosmos SDK uses two methods to perform upgrades. 

- Exporting the entire application state to a JSON file using the `export` CLI command, making changes, and then starting a new binary with the changed JSON file as the genesis file. See the [Chain Upgrade Guide](../migrations/chain-upgrade-guide-040.md#upgrade-procedure). 

- Version v0.43 and later can perform upgrades in place to significantly decrease the upgrade time for chains with a larger state. Use the [Migration Upgrade Guide](../building-modules/upgrade.md) guide to set up your application modules to take advantage of in-place upgrades.
  

> This document outlines the second method described above. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document provides steps to use the In-Place Store Migrations upgrade method.
```

<!--
order: 15
-->

> # Upgrades

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# In-Place Store Migrations
```

Upgrade your app modules smoothly with custom in-place migration logic.

> The Cosmos SDK currently has two ways to perform upgrades. The first way is by exporting the entire application state to a JSON file, making changes, and then starting a new binary with the changed JSON file as the genesis file. The second way is by performing upgrades in place, significantly decreasing the time needed to perform upgrades for chains with a larger state. The following will guide you on how to setup your application to take advantage of the second method described above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Cosmos SDK currently has two ways to perform upgrades. The first way is by exporting the entire application state to a JSON file using the `simd export` CLI command, making changes, and then starting a new binary with the changed JSON file as the genesis file. The second way is by performing upgrades in place, significantly decreasing the time needed to perform upgrades for chains with a larger state. The following will guide you on how to setup your application to take advantage of the second method described above.
```

# Enabling Upgrades

To enable your application to conform to the upgrade module's specifications, a few changes need to be made to your application.

# Genesis State

Each app module's consensus version must be saved to state on the application's genesis. This can be done by adding the following line to the `InitChainer` method in `app.go`

```diff
func (app *MyApp) InitChainer(ctx sdk.Context, req abci.RequestInitChain) abci.ResponseInitChain {
  ...
+ app.UpgradeKeeper.SetModuleVersionMap(ctx, app.mm.GetVersionMap())
  ...
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would be useful to a paragraph here about what VersionMap and ConsensusVersion are

The consensus version is defined on each app module by the module developer. It serves as the breaking change version of the module. 

### Version Map
The version map is a mapping of module names to consensus versions. The map is persisted to state for use during in-place migrations. 

## Upgrade Handlers

Upgrades utilize an `UpgradeHandler` to facilitate migrations. `UpgradeHandler`s are functions implemented by the app developer that conform to the following function signature.

```golang
type UpgradeHandler func(ctx sdk.Context, plan Plan, versionMap VersionMap) (VersionMap, error)
```

## Running Migrations

In practice, the handlers should simply call and return the values from the `app.mm.RunMigrations` function. The `RunMigrations` function should be passed the `VersionMap` from the `UpgradeHandler`. With this, the `RunMigration` function will loop through the `VersionMap`, and for any current app module who's consensus version is greater than its corresponding value in the `VersionMap`, have its migration scripts ran. To learn how to configure migration scripts, refer to (this guide)[../building-modules/upgrade.md].

## Adding New Modules In Upgrades

> New modules can be introduced to the application during an upgrade. The SDK recognizes new modules during upgrades and will call the corresponding module's `DefaultGenesis` function to setup the its initial state. This can be skipped if the module does not require any inital state. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New modules can be introduced to the application during an upgrade. The SDK recognizes new modules during upgrades and will call the corresponding module's `InitGenesis` function to setup the its initial state. This can be skipped if the module does not require any inital state. 
```

<!--
order: 15
-->

# In-Place Store Migrations

Upgrade your app modules smoothly with custom in-place migration logic. {synopsis}

The Cosmos SDK currently has two ways to perform upgrades. The first way is by exporting the entire application state to a JSON file using the `export` CLI command, making changes, and then starting a new binary with the changed JSON file as the genesis file. The second way is by performing upgrades in place, significantly decreasing the time needed to perform upgrades for chains with a larger state. The following guide will provide you with the necessary information in order to setup your application to take advantage of in-place upgrades.

> ## Genesis State

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Tracking Module Versions

Each module gets assigned a consensus version by the module developer, which serves as the breaking change version of the module. The SDK keeps track of all modules' consensus versions in the x/upgrade's `VersionMap` store. During an upgrade, the SDK calculates the difference between old and new `VersionMap`s, and runs module-specific migrations where consensus versions are incremented.

The next paragraphs detail each component of the in-place store migration process, and gives instructions on how to update your app to take advantages of this functionality.

### Genesis State
```

I thought a small intro was clearer than jumping right into Genesis

> Each app module's consensus version must be saved to state on the application's genesis. This can be done by adding the following line to the `InitChainer` method in `app.go`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When starting a new chain, each module's consensus version must be saved to state on the application's genesis. This can be done by adding the following line to the `InitChainer` method in `app.go`
```

```diff
func (app *MyApp) InitChainer(ctx sdk.Context, req abci.RequestInitChain) abci.ResponseInitChain {
  ...
+ app.UpgradeKeeper.SetModuleVersionMap(ctx, app.mm.GetVersionMap())
  ...
}
```

Using this information, the SDK will be able to detect when modules with newer versions are introduced to the app. 

### Consensus Version

> The consensus version is defined on each app module by the module developer. It serves as the breaking change version of the module. This number is how the SDK identifies which modules to upgrade. For example, if the bank module was version 2, and an upgrade introduces bank module 3, the SDK will know to upgrade the bank module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The consensus version is defined on each app module by the module developer. It serves as the breaking change version of the module. This number is how the SDK identifies which modules to upgrade. For example, if the bank module was version 2, and an upgrade introduces bank module 3, the SDK will know to upgrade the bank module and run its version 2 to 3 migration script.
```

### Version Map

> The version map is a mapping of module names to consensus versions. The map is persisted to state for use during in-place migrations. When migrations finish, the updated version map is persisted to state. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The version map is a mapping of module names to consensus versions. The map is persisted to x/upgrade's state for use during in-place migrations. When migrations finish, the updated version map is persisted to state. 
```

## Upgrade Handlers

> Upgrades utilize an `UpgradeHandler` to facilitate migrations. `UpgradeHandler`s are functions implemented by the app developer that conform to the following function signature. These functions utiltize a `VersionMap` containing all the module versions to determine which modules need upgrading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upgrades utilize an `UpgradeHandler` to facilitate migrations. `UpgradeHandler`s are functions implemented by the app developer that conform to the following function signature. These functions retrieve the `VersionMap` from x/upgrade's state, and returns the new `VersionMap` to be stored in x/upgrade after the upgrade. The diff between the two `VersionMap`s determines which modules need upgrading.
```

```golang
type UpgradeHandler func(ctx sdk.Context, plan Plan, fromVM VersionMap) (VersionMap, error)
```

Inside these functions, you should perform any upgrade logic you wish to include in the provided `plan`. All upgrade handler functions should end with the following line of code:

```golang
  return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, fromVM)
```

## Running Migrations

> Migrations are run inside of an `UpgradeHandler` via `app.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, vm)`. As described above, `UpgradeHandler`s are functions which describe the functionality to occur during an upgrade. The `RunMigration` function will loop through the `VersionMap` argument, and run the migration scripts for any versions that are less than the new binary's app module versions. Once the migrations are finished, a new `VersionMap` will be returned to persist the upgraded module versions to state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Migrations are run inside of an `UpgradeHandler` via `app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, vm)`. As described above, `UpgradeHandler`s are functions which describe the functionality to occur during an upgrade. The `RunMigration` function will loop through the `VersionMap` argument, and run the migration scripts for any versions that are less than the new binary's app module versions. Once the migrations are finished, a new `VersionMap` will be returned to persist the upgraded module versions to state.
```

```golang
cfg := module.NewConfigurator(...)
app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, vm module.VersionMap) (module.VersionMap, error) {

    // ...
    // do upgrade logic
    // ...

    // RunMigrations returns the VersionMap
    // with the updated module ConsensusVersions

>     return app.RunMigrations(ctx, vm)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, vm)
```

I removed the method on simapp in #9007

})
```

To learn more about configuring migration scripts, refer to this (guide)[../building-modules/upgrade.md].

## Adding New Modules In Upgrades

> Entirely new modules can be introduced to the application during an upgrade. The SDK recognizes new modules during upgrades and will call the corresponding module's `InitGenesis` function to setup its initial state. This can be skipped if the module does not require any inital state. Otherwise, it is important to implement `InitGenesis` for new modules to successfully upgrade your application without error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Entirely new modules can be introduced to the application during an upgrade. The SDK recognizes new modules during upgrades because their consensus version in the `fromVM` `VersionMap` is 0. In this case, `RunMigrations` will call the corresponding module's `InitGenesis` function to setup its initial state. This can be skipped if the module does not require any inital state. Otherwise, it is important to implement `InitGenesis` for new modules to successfully upgrade your application without error.
```

In the scenario where your application does not need any inital state via `InitGenesis`, you must take extra steps to ensure `InitGenesis` is skipped to avoid errors. To do so, you simply need to update the value of the module version in the `VersionMap` in the `UpgradeHandler`. 

```go
// Foo is a new module being introduced
// in this upgrade plan
import foo "github.com/my/module/foo"

app.UpgradeKeeper.SetUpgradeHandler("my-plan", func(ctx sdk.Context, plan upgradetypes.Plan, vm module.VersionMap)  (module.VersionMap, error) {
    // We make sure to set foo's version to the latest ConsensusVersion in the VersionMap.
    // This will skip running InitGenesis on Foo
    vm["foo"] = foo.AppModule{}.ConsensusVersion()

    return app.mm.RunMigrations(ctx, cfg, vm)
})
```

> Using a similar method, you can also run InitGenesis on your new module with a custom genesis state:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using a similar method, you can also run `InitGenesis` on your new module with a custom genesis state:
```
